LDAP automatic user provisioning (#20033)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/v25.3/ldap-authentication.md

> toc: true

Reviewer: A few comments I had on v25.2 should also apply here.

- Network connectivity on port 636 for LDAPS.
- A service account (bind DN) with permissions to search the directory for basic information about users and groups. For example, in Microsoft Entra ID, a [service principal](https://learn.microsoft.com/entra/architecture/secure-service-accounts) with the Directory Readers role.
- The LDAP server's CA certificate, if using a custom CA not already trusted by the CockroachDB host.
- Verification that the attribute values that will become CockroachDB usernames meet the CockroachDB [requirements for usernames]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/create-user.md %}#user-names).

Before you begin, it may be useful to enable authentication logging, which can help you confirm successful configuration or troubleshoot issues. For details, refer to [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting).

### Step 1: Enable redaction of sensitive cluster settings

> For this integration, you will need to store LDAP bind credentials for the service account that enables the integration in the cluster setting `server.host_based_authentication.configuration`. You will also configure the mapping of external identities to CockroachDB SQL users with the cluster setting `server.identity_map.configuration`. In addition, for a custom CA configuration, you may need to store certificate and key details in specified cluster settings. 

Reviewer: Suggest linking directly to both cluster settings on cluster-settings.md.

Is it clear what "specified cluster settings" refers to?

If, for LDAPS, you are using a certificate signed by a custom Certificate Authority (CA) that is not in the system's trusted CA store, you will need to configure the CA certificate. This step is only necessary when using certificates signed by your organization's private CA or other untrusted CA.

**Set the custom CA certificate:**

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
SET CLUSTER SETTING server.ldap_authentication.domain.custom_ca = '<PEM_ENCODED_CA_CERT>';
~~~

**Configure a client certificate for mTLS if required:**

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
SET CLUSTER SETTING server.ldap_authentication.client.tls_certificate = '<PEM_ENCODED_CERT>';
SET CLUSTER SETTING server.ldap_authentication.client.tls_key = '<PEM_ENCODED_KEY>';
~~~

### Step 4: Configure user creation

CockroachDB supports two approaches for the creation of users who will authenticate via LDAP:

#### Option 1: Automatic user provisioning (recommended)

{% include_cached new-in.html version="v25.3" %}

> 

Reviewer: Maybe no line break here? I think the version tag is formatted **New in v25.3:** so the sentence should follow directly.

> With automatic user provisioning, CockroachDB creates users automatically during their first successful LDAP authentication. This eliminates the need for custom scrpting to create user accounts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With automatic user provisioning, CockroachDB creates users automatically during their first successful LDAP authentication. This eliminates the need for custom scripting to create user accounts.
```

When enabled:

- Users are created automatically upon successful LDAP authentication.

> - All auto-provisioned users receive a `PROVISIONSRC` role option set to `ldap:<ldap_server>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- All auto-provisioned users receive a `PROVISIONSRC` role option set to `ldap:{ldap_server}`.
```

- The `estimated_last_login_time` is tracked for auditing purposes.
- Auto-provisioned users cannot change their own passwords (managed via LDAP only).

> For Active Directory deployments, the CockroachDB username will match the `sAMAccountName` field from the `user` object. This field name should be specified in the HBA configuration using `ldapsearchattribute=sAMAccountName`. Ensure that the values in the field you are using for `ldapsearchattribute` meet the CockroachDB [requirements for usernames]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/create-user.md %}#user-names).

Reviewer: Is there a link for Active Directory? 

```suggestion
For Active Directory deployments, the CockroachDB username will match the `sAMAccountName` field from the `user` object. Specify this field name with `ldapsearchattribute=sAMAccountName`  in the HBA configuration. Ensure that the values in the field you are using for `ldapsearchattribute` meet the CockroachDB [requirements for usernames]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/create-user.md %}#user-names).
```

{{site.data.alerts.callout_info}}

> Before you enable automatic user provisioning, it is recommended that you enable [LDAP Authorization]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ldap-authorization.md %}). This will ensure that upon initial login, new CockroachDB users are members of the intended CockroachDB roles, with the privileges they confer, according to users' group memberships in the directory. Otherwise, functionality may be limited for a new user until your alternative process applies roles or privileges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you enable automatic user provisioning, it is recommended that you enable [LDAP Authorization]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ldap-authorization.md %}). This ensures that upon initial login, new CockroachDB users are members of the intended CockroachDB roles, with the privileges they confer, according to users' group memberships in the directory. Otherwise, functionality may be limited for a new user until your alternative process applies roles or privileges.
```

> If you choose to manage CockroachDB role memberships and privileges directly, you could script the required [`GRANT`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/grant.md %}) commands to be [executed]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-sql.md %}#general) as needed.

Reviewer: Does "script ... to be executed" need an example? Not sure.

{{site.data.alerts.callout_info}}
Authorization (role-based access control) is not applied when logging in to DB Console.
{{site.data.alerts.end}}

## Managing auto-provisioned users

When automatic user provisioning is enabled, you can identify and manage auto-provisioned users using the following methods:

### Viewing provisioned users

Auto-provisioned users can be identified by their `PROVISIONSRC` role option:

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
-- View all auto-provisioned users (users with PROVISIONSRC role option)
SELECT * FROM [SHOW USERS] AS u 
WHERE EXISTS (
  SELECT 1 FROM unnest(u.options) AS opt 
  WHERE opt LIKE 'PROVISIONSRC=ldap:%'
);
~~~

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
-- View all manually created users (users without PROVISIONSRC role option)
SELECT * FROM [SHOW USERS] AS u 
WHERE NOT EXISTS (
  SELECT 1 FROM unnest(u.options) AS opt 

>   WHERE opt LIKE 'PROVISIONSRC=ldap:%'

Author: Modified one of the `## Managing auto-provisioned users` sections to become `### Last-login tracking for usage and dormancy`

);
~~~

### Cleaning up users removed from Active Directory

Auto-provisioned users who have been removed or deactivated in Active Directory will not be automatically removed from CockroachDB. To identify and clean up these orphaned accounts:

**Step 1: Export auto-provisioned users from CockroachDB**

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
-- Export list of auto-provisioned usernames for comparison with Active Directory
SELECT u.username FROM [SHOW USERS] AS u 
WHERE EXISTS (
  SELECT 1 FROM unnest(u.options) AS opt 
  WHERE opt LIKE 'PROVISIONSRC=ldap:%'
);
~~~

**Step 2: Cross-reference with Active Directory**

Use your organization's directory tools to verify which of these users still exist in Active Directory. For example, you might use PowerShell with Active Directory cmdlets:

> ```powershell

Reviewer: Add the copy syntax too

```suggestion
~~~powershell
```

# Example PowerShell script to check if users exist in AD
$cockroachUsers = @("user1", "user2", "user3")  # Replace with actual usernames
$orphanedUsers = @()

foreach ($user in $cockroachUsers) {
    try {
        Get-ADUser -Identity $user -ErrorAction Stop | Out-Null
    } catch {
        $orphanedUsers += $user
        Write-Host "User not found in AD: $user"
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~
```

**Step 3: Remove orphaned users**

Before dropping users confirmed to no longer exist in Active Directory, check for any privileges that were granted directly to the user:

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
-- Check for direct grants to the user (privileges inherited through roles won't block DROP USER)  
SHOW GRANTS FOR username;
~~~

If any direct grants exist, revoke them before dropping the user. For users confirmed to no longer exist in Active Directory:

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
-- Remove users that no longer exist in Active Directory
DROP USER username1, username2, username3;
~~~

{{site.data.alerts.callout_info}}

> Users cannot be dropped if they have direct privilege grants or own database objects. For complete requirements, see [`DROP USER`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/drop-user.md %}). When using both automatic user provisioning and LDAP Authorization, consider granting privileges primarily through roles (mapped to AD groups) rather than directly to users to simplify cleanup operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users cannot be dropped if they have direct privilege grants or own database objects. For complete requirements, refer to [`DROP USER`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/drop-user.md %}). When using both automatic user provisioning and LDAP Authorization, consider granting privileges primarily through roles (mapped to AD groups) rather than directly to users to simplify cleanup operations.
```

{{site.data.alerts.end}}

### Login time tracking

> {% include_cached new-in.html version="v25.3" %}

Reviewer: Same comment as above

The `estimated_last_login_time` column tracks when users last authenticated:

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
SHOW USERS;
~~~

Example output:

~~~ 
     username    |                options                | member_of | estimated_last_login_time  
-----------------+---------------------------------------+-----------+----------------------------
  admin          | {}                                    | {}        | NULL  
  root           | {}                                    | {admin}   | 2025-06-01 11:51:29.406216+00  
  e.codd         | {PROVISIONSRC=ldap:example.com}       | {}        | 2025-08-04 19:18:00.201402+00  
~~~

{{site.data.alerts.callout_info}}
`estimated_last_login_time` is computed on a best-effort basis and may not capture every login event due to asynchronous updates.
{{site.data.alerts.end}}

### Restrictions on auto-provisioned users

Users created through automatic provisioning have specific restrictions:

> - **Password changes**: Auto-provisioned users cannot change their own passwords using `ALTER USER`, even if the cluster setting `sql.auth.change_own_password.enabled` is true.

Reviewer: Maybe link to ALTER USER

3. Use a restricted service account for directory searches.
4. Regularly audit LDAP group memberships.
5. Monitor authentication logs for unusual patterns.

> 6. **Auto-provisioning considerations**:

Reviewer: The numbers in this list should all be `1.`
